Satis quod sufficit.
I praise God for you, sir:your reasons at dinner
have been sharpand sententious;
pleasant without scurrility,witty without affection,
audacious without impudency,learned without opinion,
and strange with- out heresy.
I did converse this quondam day
with a companion of the king's,who is intituled, nominated,
or called, DonAdriano de Armado.
Novi hominem tanquam te:his humour is lofty,
his discourse peremptory,his tongue filed,
his eye ambitious,his gait majestical,
and his general behavior vain,ridiculous, and thrasonical.
He is too picked, too spruce,too affected, too odd,
as it were, too peregrinate,as I may say.
A most singular and choiceepithet.
He draweth out the threadof his verbosity finer
than the stapleof his argument.
I abhor such fanaticalphantasimes, such insociable
and point-devise companions;such rackers of orthography,
as to speak dout, fine,when he should say doubt;
det, when he shouldpronounce debt,
--d, e, b, t, not d, e, t:he clepeth a calf, cauf;
(laughing throughout speech)
half, hauf; neighbour vocaturnebor; neigh abbreviated ne.
This is abhominable, --whichhe would call abbominable:
it insinuateth me of insanie:
anne intelligis, domine?to make frantic, lunatic.
Laus Deo, bene intelligo.
Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! alittle scratch'd, 'twill serve.
Videsne quis venit?
Video, et gaudeo.
Men of peace, wellencountered.
Most military sir,salutation.
Sir, it is the king'smost sweet pleasure
and affection to congratulatethe princess at her
pavilion in theposteriors of this day,
which the rude multitudecall the afternoon.
The posterior of theday, most generous sir,
is liable, congruent andmeasurable for the afternoon:
the word is well chosen,culled, sweet and apt,
I do assure you,sir, I do assure.
Sir, the king is a noblegentleman, and my familiar,
I do assure ye,very good friend:
for what is inward between us,let it pass.
But I must tell thee, itwill please his grace,
by the world, sometime tolean upon my poor shoulder,
and with his royal finger,thus, dally with my excrement,
with my mustachio; but,sweet heart, let that pass.
By the world, Irecount no fable:
some certain special honoursit pleaseth his greatness
to impart to Armado, asoldier, a man of travel,
that hath seen the world;but let that pass.
The very all of allis,--but, sweet heart,
I do implore secrecy,--thatthe king would have me
present the princess,sweet chuck,
with some delightfulostentation, or show,
or pageant, orantique, or firework.
Now, understanding that thecurate and your sweet self
are good at such eruptions andsudden breaking out of mirth,
as it were, I have acquaintedyou to the end withal,
to craveyour assistance.
They have been at a greatfeast of languages,
and stolen the scraps.
O, they have lived long onthe alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hathnot eaten thee for a word;
Sir, you shall present beforeher the Nine Worthies.
Sir Nathaniel, as concerningsome entertainment of time,
some show in the posteriorof this day, to be rendered
by our assistants, atthe king's command,
and this mostgallant, illustrate,
and learned gentleman,before the princess;
I say none so fit as topresent the Nine Worthies.
Where will you find men worthyenough to present them?
Joshua, yourself;myself, Alexander,
this gallant gentleman,Judas Maccabaeus;
the swain, by reason ofhis great limb or joint,
shall pass Pompey the Great;
the page, Hercules,--
Pardon, sir; error: heis not quantity
for that Worthy's thumb:
he is not so big asthe end of his club.
Shall I have audience? he shallpresent Hercules in minority:
his enter and exit shallbe strangling a snake;
and I will have an prologueto their purpose.
An excellent device! so, ifany of the audience hiss,
you may cry 'Welldone, Hercules!
now thou crushest the snake!'
For the rest of the Worthies?--
I will play three myself.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will have, if thisfadge not, an antique.
I beseech you, follow.
Via, goodman Dull! thou hastspoken no word all this time.
Nor understood noneneither, sir.
Allons! we will employthee.
I'll make one in a dance,or so; or I will play
On the tabour to the Worthies,and let them dance the hay.
Most dull, honest Dull! Toour sport, away!
Sweet hearts, we shall berich ere we depart,
If fairings come thusplentifully in:
A lady wall'd about withdiamonds!
Look you what I have fromthe loving king.
Madame, came nothing elsealong with that?
Nothing but this! yes, asmuch love in rhyme
As would be cramm'd up ina sheet of paper,
Writ o' both sides theleaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to sealon Cupid's name.
That was the way to makehis godhead wax,
For he hath been fivethousand years a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappygallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends withhim; a' kill'd your sister.
He made her melancholy,sad, and heavy;
And so she died: had shebeen light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble,stirring spirit,
She might ha' been agrandam ere she died:
And so may you; for alight heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning,mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in abeauty dark.
We need more light to findyour meaning out.
You'll mar the light bytaking it in snuff;
Therefore I'll darkly endthe argument.
See what you do, you doit still i' the dark.
So do not you, for you area light wench.
I weigh not you,and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, that'syou care not for me.
Great reason; for 'pastcure is still past care.'
Well bandied both; a setof wit well play'd.
But Rosaline, you have afavour too:
Who sent it? and what isit?
I would you knew:
An if my face were but asfair as yours,
My favour were as great;be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, Ithank Biron:
The numbers true; and,were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddesson the ground:
I am compared to twentythousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn mypicture in his letter!
Any thing like?
Much in the letters;nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink; a goodconclusion.
But, Katharine, what was sentto you from fair Dumain?
Madam, this glove.
Did he not send you twain?
Yes, madam, and moreover
Some thousand verses of afaithful lover,
A huge translation ofhypocrisy,
Vilely compiled, profoundsimplicity.
This and these pearls tome sent Longaville:
The letter is too long byhalf a mile.
I think no less. Dost thounot wish in heart
The chain were longer andthe letter short?
Ay, or I would these handsmight never part.
We are wise girls to mockour lovers so.
They are worse fools topurchase mocking so.
That same Biron I'lltorture ere I go:
O that I knew he were butin by the week!
How I would make him fawnand beg and seek
And wait the season andobserve the times
And spend his prodigalwits in bootless rhymes
And shape his servicewholly to my hests
And make him proud to makeme proud that jests!
So perttaunt-like would Io'ersway his state
That he should be my fooland I his fate.
None are so surely caught,when they are catch'd,
As wit turn'd fool: folly,in wisdom hatch'd,
Hath wisdom's warrant andthe help of school
And wit's own grace tograce a learned fool.
The blood of youth burnsnot with such excess
As gravity's revolt towantonness.
O, I am stabb'd withlaughter! Where's her grace?
Thy news Boyet?
Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm!encounters mounted are
Against your peace: Lovedoth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments; you'llbe surprised:
Muster your wits; stand inyour own defence;
Or hide your heads likecowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to SaintCupid! What are they
That charge their breathagainst us? say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of asycamore
I thought to close mineeyes some half an hour;
When, lo! to interrupt mypurposed rest,
Toward that shade I mightbehold addrest
The king and his companions:
warily I stole into aneighbour thicket by,
And overheard what youshall overhear,
That, by and by, disguisedthey will be here.
But what, but what, comethey to visit us?
They do, they do: and areapparell'd thus.
Like Muscovites orRussians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parle,to court and dance;
And every one hislove-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress,which they'll know
By favours several whichthey did bestow.
And will they so? thegallants shall be task'd;
For, ladies, we shallevery one be mask'd;
And not a man of themshall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see alady's face.
Hold, Rosaline, thisfavour thou shalt wear,
And then the king willcourt thee for his dear;
Hold, take thou this, mysweet, and give me thine,
So shall Biron take me forRosaline.
And change your favourstoo; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived bythese removes.
Come on, then; wear thefavours most in sight.
But in this changing whatis your intent?
The effect of my intent isto cross theirs:
They do it but in mockingmerriment;
And mock for mock is onlymy intent.
Their several counselsthey unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and sobe mock'd withal
Upon the next occasionthat we meet,
With visages displayed, totalk and greet.
But shall we dance, ifthey desire to't?
No, to the death, we willnot move a foot;
Nor to their penn'd speechrender we no grace,
But while 'tis spoke eachturn away her face.
Why, that contempt willkill the speaker's heart,
And quite divorce hismemory from his part.
Therefore I do it; and Imake no doubt
The rest will ne'er comein, if he be out
There's no such sport assport by sport o'erthrown,
To make theirs ours andours none but our own:
So shall we stay, mockingintended game,
And they, well mock'd,depart away with shame.
(♪ trumpet)
The trumpet sounds: bemask'd; the maskers come.
All hail, the richestbeauties on the earth!--
A holy parcel of thefairest dames.
That ever turn'dtheir--backs--to mortal views!
Their eyes, villain, theireyes!
That ever turn'd their eyeson mortal views! --Out--
True; out indeed.
Boyet: What would thesestrangers? know their minds,
If they do speak ourlanguage, 'tis our will:
That some plain manrecount their purposes
Know what they would.
What would you with theprincess?
Nothing but peace andgentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Why, that they have; andbid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, andyou may be gone.
Say to her, we havemeasured many miles
To tread a measure withher on this grass.
They say, that they havemeasured many a mile
To tread a measure withyou on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them howmany inches
Is in one mile: if theyhave measured many,
The measure then of one iseasily told.
If to come hither you havemeasured miles,
And many miles, theprincess bids you tell
How many inches doth fillup one mile.
Tell her, we measure themby weary steps.
She hears herself.
How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles youhave o'ergone,
Are number'd in the travelof one mile?
We number nothing that wespend for you:
Our duty is so rich, soinfinite,
That we may do it stillwithout accompt.
Vouchsafe to show thesunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, mayworship it.
My face is but a moon, andclouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to doas such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, andthese thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, uponour watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg agreater matter;
Thou now request'st butmoonshine in the water.
Then, in our measure dobut vouchsafe one change.
Thou bid'st me beg: thisbegging is not strange.
Play, music, then! Nay,you must do it soon.
Not yet! no dance! Thuschange I like the moon.
Will you not dance? Howcome you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full,but now she's changed.
Yet still she is the moon,and I the man.
The music plays; vouchsafesome motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it.
But your legs should doit.
Since you are strangersand come here by chance,
We'll not be nice:
Take hands.
We will not dance.
If you deny to dance,let's hold more chat.
In private, then.
I am best pleased withthat.
White-handed mistress, onesweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, andsugar; there is three.
Nay then, two treys, andif you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, andmalmsey: well run, dice!
There's half-a-dozensweets.
Seventh sweet, adieu:
Since you can cog, I'llplay no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall.
Gall! bitter.
Therefore meet.
Will you vouchsafe with meto change a word?
Name it.
Fair lady,--
Say you so? Fair lord,--
Take that for your fairlady.
Please it you,
As much in private, andI'll bid adieu.
What, was your vizard madewithout a tongue?
I know the reason, lady,why you ask.
O for your reason!quickly, sir; I long.
You have a double tonguewithin your mask,
And would afford myspeechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman.Is not 'veal' a calf?
A calf, fair lady!
No, a fair lord calf.
Let's part the word.
No, I'll not be your half
Take all, and wean it; itmay prove an ox.
Look, how you butt yourselfin these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns,chaste lady? do not so.
Then die a calf, beforeyour horns do grow.
One word in private withyou, ere I die.
Bleat softly then; thebutcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mockingwenches are as keen
As is the razor's edgeinvisible,
Cutting a smaller hairthan may be seen,
Above the sense of sense;so sensible
Seemeth their conference;their conceits have wings
Fleeter than arrows, bullets,wind, thought, swifter things.
Not one word more, my maids;break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beatenwith pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches; youhave simple wits.
Twenty adieus, my frozenMuscovits.
Are these the breed ofwits so wonder'd at?
Tapers they are, with yoursweet breaths puff'd out.
Well-liking wits they have;gross, gross; fat, fat.
O poverty in wit,kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you,hang themselves tonight?
Or ever, but in vizards,show their faces?
This pert Biron was out ofcountenance quite.
O, they were all inlamentable cases!
The king was weeping-ripefor a good word.
Biron did swear himselfout of all suit.
Dumain was at my service,and his sword:
No point, quoth I; myservant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said, Icame o'er his heart;
And trow you what hecalled me?
Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith.
Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits haveworn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? theking is my love sworn.
And quick Biron hathplighted troth to me.
And Longaville was for myservice born.
Dumain is mine, as sure asbark on tree.
Madam, and prettymistresses, give ear:
Immediately they willagain be here
In their own shapes; forit can never be
They will digest thisharsh indignity.
Will they return?
They will, they will, Godknows,
And leap for joy, thoughthey are lame with blows:
Therefore change favours;and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses inthis summer air.
What shall we do,
If they return in theirown shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by meyou'll be advised,
Let's, mock them still, aswell known as disguised:
Let us complain to themwhat fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites,in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they wereand to what end
Their shallow shows andprologue vilely penn'd
Fair sir, God save you!Where's the princess?
Gone to her tent. Pleaseit your majesty
Command me any service toher thither?
That she vouchsafe meaudience for one word.
I will; and so will she, Iknow, my lord.
This fellow pecks up witas pigeons pease,
And utters it again whenGod doth please:
He is wit's pedler, andretails his wares
At wakes and wassails,meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross,the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace tograce it with such show.
This is the ape of form,monsieur the nice,
That, when he plays attables, chides the dice
In honourable terms: O, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and inushering
Mend him who can: theladies call him sweet;
The stairs, as he treadson them, kiss his feet:
This is the flower thatsmiles on every one,
To show his teeth as whiteas whale's bone;
And consciences, that willnot die in debt,
Pay him the due ofhoney-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweettongue, with my heart,
That put Armado's page outof his part!
See where it comes!Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman show'dthee? and what art thou now?
All hail, sweet madam, andfair time of day!
'Fair' in 'all hail' isfoul, as I conceive.
Construe my speechesbetter, if you may.
Then wish me better; Iwill give you leave.
We came to visit you, andpurpose now
To lead you to our court;vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me;and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delightsin perjured men.
Rebuke me not for thatwhich you provoke:
The virtue of your eyemust break my oath.
You nickname virtue; viceyou should have spoke;
For virtue's office neverbreaks men's troth.
Now by my maiden honour,yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, Iprotest,
A world of torments thoughI should endure,
I would not yield to beyour house's guest;
So much I hate a breakingcause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vow'dwith integrity.
O, you have lived indesolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much toour shame.
Not so, my lord; it is notso, I swear;
We have had pastimes hereand pleasant game:
A mess of Russians left usbut of late.
How, madam! Russians!
Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full ofcourtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It isnot so, my lord:
My lady, to the manner ofthe days,
In courtesy givesundeserving praise.
We four indeed confrontedwere with four
In Russian habit: herethey stay'd an hour,
And talk'd apace; and inthat hour, my lord,
They did not bless us withone happy word.
I dare not call themfools; but this I think,
When fools are thirsty,they would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me.Fair gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise thingsfoolish: when we greet,
With eyes best seeing,heaven's fiery eye,
By light we lose light:your capacity
Is of that nature that toyour huge store
Wise things seem foolishand rich things but poor.
This proves you wise andrich, for in my eye,--
I am a fool, and full ofpoverty.
But that you take whatdoth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatchwords from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and allthat I possess!
All the fool mine?
I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards wasit that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard?why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard;that superfluous case
That hid the worse andshow'd the better face.
We are descried; they'llmock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn itto a jest.
Amazed, my lord? why looksyour highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! he'llswoon! Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, comingfrom Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars downplagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass holdlonger out?
Here stand I, Lady, dart thyskill at me;
Bruise me with scorn,confound me with a flout;
Thrust thy sharp wit quitethrough my ignorance;
Cut me to pieces with thykeen conceit;
And I will wish thee nevermore to dance,
Nor never more in Russianhabit wait.
O, never will I trust tospeeches penn'd,
Nor to the motion of aschoolboy's tongue,
Nor never come in vizardto my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like ablind harper's song!
Taffeta phrases, silkenterms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles,spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical; thesesummer-flies
Have blown me full ofmaggot ostentation:
I do forswear them; and Ihere protest,
By this white glove;--howwhite the hand, God knows!--
Henceforth my wooing mindshall be express'd
In russet yeas and honestkersey noes:
And, to begin, wench,--soGod help me, la!--
My love to thee is sound,sans crack or flaw.
Sans sans, I pray you.
Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear withme, I am sick;
I'll leave it by degrees.
These lords are visited;you are not free,
For the Lord's tokens onyou do I see.
No, they are free thatgave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit:seek not to undo us.
It is not so; for how canthis be true,
That you stand forfeit,being those that sue?
Peace! for I will not haveto do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do asI intend.
Speak for yourselves; mywit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, forour rude transgression
Some fair excuse.
The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but evennow disguised?
Madam, I was.
And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam.
When you then were here,
What did you whisper inyour lady's ear?
That more than all theworld I did respect her.
When she shall challengethis, you will reject her.
Upon mine honour, no.
Peace, peace! forbear:
Your oath once broke, youforce not to forswear.
Despise me, when I breakthis oath of mine.
I will: and therefore keepit. Rosaline,
What did the Russianwhisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that hedid hold me dear
As precious eyesight, anddid value me
Above this world; addingthereto moreover
That he would wed me, orelse die my lover.
God give thee joy of him!the noble lord
Most honourably dothunhold his word.
What mean you, madam? bymy life, my troth,
I never swore this ladysuch an oath.
By heaven, you did; and toconfirm it plain,
You gave me this: but takeit, sir, again.
My faith and this theprincess I did give:
I knew her by this jewelon her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jeweldid she wear;
And Lord Biron, I thankhim, is my dear.
What, will you have me, oryour pearl again?
Neither of either; I remitboth twain.
I see the trick on't: herewas a consent,
Knowing aforehand of ourmerriment,
The ladies did changefavours: and then we,
Following the signs, woo'dbut the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to addmore terror,
We are again forsworn, inwill and error.
Much upon this it is: andmight not you
Forestall our sport, tomake us thus untrue?
Full merrily
Hath this brave manage,this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight!Peace! I have done.
(♪ Loud drum)
Welcome, pure wit! thoupartest a fair fray.
O Lord, sir, they wouldknow
Whether the three Worthiesshall come in or no.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turn it finely off,sir; we will take some care.
Biron, they will shame us:let them not approach.
We are shame-proof, mylord: and tis some policy
To have one show worse thanthe king's and his company.
I say they shall not come in.
Nay, my good lord, let meo'errule you now:
That sport best pleasesthat doth least know how:
Where zeal strives tocontent, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of thatwhich it presents:
Their form confoundedmakes most form in mirth,
When great things labouringperish in their birth.
A right description of oursport, my lord.
Anointed, I implore somuch of your
royal sweet breath as will uttera brace of words.
Doth this man serve God?
Why ask you?
He speaks not like a manof God's making.
That is all one, my fair,sweet, honey monarch; for,
I protest, the schoolmasteris exceeding fantastical;
too, too vain, too toovain: but we will put it,
as they say, tofortuna de la guerra.
I wish you the peace ofmind, most royal couplement!
Here is like to be a goodpresence of Worthies.
He presents Hector of Troy;the swain, Pompey the Great;
the parish curate,Alexander; Armado's page,
Hercules; the pedant,Judas Maccabaeus:
I Pompey am,--
You lie, you are not he.
With libbard's head onknee.
Well said, old mocker: I mustneeds be friends with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompeysurnamed the Big--
The Great.
It is, 'Great,' sir:--
Pompey surnamed the Great;
That oft in field, withtarge and shield,
did make my foe to sweat: Andtravelling along this coast,
I here am come bychance, And lay my arms
before the legs of thissweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say,'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.
Great thanks, greatPompey.
'Tis not so much worth;but I hope I was perfect:
I made a littlefault in 'Great.'
My hat to a halfpenny, Pompeyproves the best Worthy.
When in the world I lived, Iwas the world's commander;
Louder.
Shhh.
By east, west, north, and south,I spread my conquering might:
My scutcheon plain declaresthat I am Alisander,--
Your nose says, no, you arenot for it stands too right.
Your nose smells 'no' in this,most tender-smelling knight.
The conqueror is dismay'd.Proceed, good Alexander.
When in the world I lived, Iwas the world's commander,--
Most true, 'tis right; youwere so, Alisander.
Pompey the Great,--
Your servant, and Costard.
Take away the conqueror,take away Alisander.
O, sir, you haveoverthrown
Alisander the conqueror!
A conqueror, andafeard to speak!
Run away for shame,Alisander.
There, an't shall pleaseyou; a foolish mild man;
an honest man, lookyou, and soon dashed.
He is a marvellous goodneighbour, faith,
and a very good bowler:but, for Alisander,
--alas, you see how 'tis,--alittle o'erparted.
But there are Worthies a-coming
will speak their mindin some other sort.
Stand aside good Pompey.
Great Hercules ispresented by this imp,
Whose club kill'd Cerberus,that three-headed canis;
And when he was a babe, achild, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangleserpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth inminority,
Ergo I come with thisapology.
Keep some state in thyexit, and vanish.
(laughing)
I, Judas am,--
A Judas!
(hissing)
Not Iscariot, sir.
Judas, yclipedMaccabaeus.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt isplain Judas.
I, Judas am,--
The more shame for you,Judas.
What mean you, sir?
To make Judas hanghimself.
Begin, sir; you are myelder.
Well followed: Judas washanged on an elder.
I will not be put out ofcountenance.
Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A cittern-head.
The head of a bodkin.
A Death's face in a ring.
The face of an old Romancoin, scarce seen.
And now forward; for we haveput thee in countenance.
You have put me out ofcountenance.
False; we have given theefaces.
But you have out-facedthem all.
An thou wert a lion, wewould do so.
Therefore, as he is anass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude!nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of hisname.
For the ass to the Jude;give it him:--Jud-as, away!
This is not generous, notgentle, not humble.
A light for Monsieur Judas! itgrows dark, he may stumble.
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, howhath he been baited!
Hide thy head, Achilles:here comes Hector in arms.
But is this Hector?
I think Hector was not soclean-timbered.
His leg is too big forHector's.
More calf, certain.
No; he is best endued inthe small.
This cannot be Hector.
He's a god or a painter;for he makes faces.
The armipotent Mars, oflances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift,--
A gilt nutmeg.
A lemon.
Stuck with cloves.
No, cloven.
Peace!--
The armipotent Mars, oflances the almighty
Gave Hector a gift, theheir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, thatcertain he would fight; yea
From morn till night, from outof his pavilion.
I am that flower,--
That mint.
That columbine.
Sweet Lord Longaville,rein thy tongue.
I must rather give it the rein,for it runs against Hector.
Ay, and Hector's agreyhound.
The sweet war-man is deadand rotten; sweet chucks,
beat not the bones of theburied: when he breathed,
he was a man. But I willforward with my device.
Sweet royalty, bestow onme the benifit of hearing.
Speak, brave Hector: weare much delighted.
This Hector far surmountedHannibal,--
The party is gone, fellowHector, she is gone;
she is two months on her way.
What meanest thou?
Faith, unless you playthe honest Troyan,
the poor wench is castaway: she's quick;
the child brags in herbelly already: tis yours.
Dost thou infamonizeme among potentates?
thou shalt die.
Then shall Hector be whippedfor Jaquenetta that is
quick by him and hanged forPompey that is dead by him.
Most rare Pompey!
Renowned Pompey!
Greater than great, great,great, great Pompey!
Pompey the Huge!
Hector trembles.
By the north pole, I dochallenge thee.
I will not fight with apole, like a northern man:
I'll slash; I'll do it bythe sword. I bepray you,
let me borrow my armsagain.
Room for the incensedWorthies!
I'll do it in my shirt.
Most resolute Pompey!
Master, let me take youa buttonhole lower.
Do you not see Pompey isuncasing for the combat?
What mean you? You willlose your reputation.
Gentlemen andsoldiers, pardon me;
I will not combat in my shirt.
What reason have youfor't?
The naked truth of itis, I have no shirt;
I go woolward for penance.
(laughing)
God save you, madam!
Welcome, Mercade;
But that thou interrupt'stour merriment.
I am sorry, madam; for thenews I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. Theking your father--
Dead, for my life!
Even so; my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scenebegins to cloud.
For mine own part, Ibreathe free breath.
I have seen the day of wrong
through the littlehole of discretion,
and I will right myselflike a soldier.
How fares your majesty?
Boyet, prepare; I willaway tonight.
Madam, not so; I dobeseech you, stay.
Prepare, I say. I thankyou, gracious lords,
For all your fairendeavors; and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul,that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom toexcuse or hide
The liberal opposition ofour spirits,
If over-boldly we haveborne ourselves
In the converse of breath:
Your gentleness was guilty ofit. Farewell worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not animble tongue:
Excuse me so, coming tooshort of thanks
For my great suit soeasily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of timeextremely forms
All causes to the purposeof his speed,
And often at his veryloose decides
That which long processcould not arbitrate:
And though the mourningbrow of progeny
Forbid the smilingcourtesy of love
The holy suit which fainit would convince,
Yet, since love's argumentwas first on foot,
Let not the cloud ofsorrow justle it
From what it purposed;since, to wail friends lost
Is not by much sowholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friendsbut newly found.
I understand you not: mygriefs are double.
Honest plain words bestpierce the ear of grief;
For your fair sakes havewe neglected time,
Play'd foul play with ouroaths: your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deform'd us,fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end ofour intents:
And what in us hath seem'dridiculous,--
As love is full ofunbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child,skipping and vain,
Form'd by the eye andtherefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, ofhabits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as theeye doth roll
To every varied object inhis glance:
Which parti-coatedpresence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in yourheavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oathsand gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, thatlook into these faults,
Suggested us to make.Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, theerror that love makes
Is likewise yours: we toourselves prove false,
By being once false forever to be true
To those that make usboth,--fair ladies, you:
We have received yourletters full of love;
Your favours, theambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council,
rated them at courtship,pleasant jest and courtesy,
As bombast and as liningto the time:
But more devout than thisin our respects
Have we not been; andtherefore met your loves
In their own fashion, likea merriment.
Our letters, madam, show'dmuch more than jest.
So did our looks.
We did not quote them so.
Now, at the latest minuteof the hour,
Grant us your loves.
A time, methinks, tooshort
To make a world-without-endbargain in.
No, no, my lord, yourgrace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness;and therefore this:
If for my love, as thereis no such cause,
You will do aught, thisshall you do for me:
Your oath I will nottrust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and nakedhermitage,
Remote from all thepleasures of the world;
There stay until thetwelve celestial signs
Have brought about theannual reckoning.
If this austere insociablelife
Change not your offer madein heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hardlodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossomsof your love,
But that it bear thistrial and last love;
Then, at the expiration ofthe year,
Come challenge me, challengeme by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palmnow kissing thine
I will be thine; and tillthat instant shut
My woeful self up in amournful house,
Raining the tears oflamentation
For the remembrance of myfather's death.
If this thou do deny, letour hands part,
Neither entitled in theother's heart.
If this, or more thanthis, I would deny,
To flatter up these powersof mine with rest,
The sudden hand of deathclose up mine eye!
Hence ever then my heartis in thy breast.
But what to me, my love?but what to me? A wife?
A beard, fair health, andhonesty;
With three-fold love Iwish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thankyou, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord; atwelvemonth and a day
I'll mark no words thatsmooth-faced wooers say:
Come when the king doth tomy lady come;
Then, if I have much love,I'll give you some.
I'll serve thee true andfaithfully till then.
Yet swear not, lest ye beforsworn again.
What says Maria?
At the twelvemonth's end
I'll change my black gownfor a faithful friend.
Studies my lady? mistress,look on me;
Behold the window of myheart, mine eye,
What humble suit attendsthy answer there:
Impose some service on mefor thy love.
Oft have I heard of you,my Lord Biron,
Before I saw you; and theworld's large tongue
Proclaims you for a manreplete with mocks,
Full of comparisons andwounding flouts,
Which you on all estateswill execute
That come within the mercyof your wit.
To weed this wormwood fromyour fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me,if you please,
Without the which I am notto be won,
You shall this twelvemonthterm from day to day
Visit the speechless sickand still converse
With groaning wretches;and your task shall be,
With all the fierceendeavor of your wit
To enforce the painedimpotent to smile.
To move wild laughter inthe throat of death?
It cannot be; it isimpossible:
Mirth cannot move a soulin agony.
Why, that's the way tochoke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begotof that loose grace
Which shallow laughinghearers give to fools:
A jest's prosperity liesin the ear
Of him that hears it,never in the tongue
Of him that makes it:then, if sickly ears,
Deaf'd with the clamoursof their own dear groans,
Will hear your idlescorns, continue then,
And I will have you andthat fault withal;
But if they will not,throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you emptyof that fault,
Right joyful of yourreformation.
A twelvemonth! well;befall what will befall,
I'll jest a twelvemonth inan hospital.
And so I take my leave.
No, madam; we will bringyou on your way.
Our wooing doth not endlike an old play;
Jack hath not Jill: theseladies' courtesy
Might well have made oursport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants atwelvemonth and a day,
And then 'twill end.
That's too long for aplay.
Sweet majesty, vouchsafeme,--
Was not that Hector?
The worthy knight of Troy.
I will kiss thy royalfinger, and take leave.
I am a votary; I havevowed to Jaquenetta
to hold the plough for hersweet love three years.
But, most esteemed greatness,will you hear the dialogue
that the two learned menhave compiled in praise
of the owl and the cuckoo?
It should have followedin the end of our show.
Call them forth quickly;we will do so.
(♪ singing)
♪ When daisies pied andviolets blue
And lady-smocks allsilver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellowhue
Do paint the meadows withdelight,
The cuckoo then, on everytree,
Mocks married men; forthus sings he, Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word offear,
Unpleasing to a marriedear!
When icicles hang by thewall
And Dick the shepherdblows his nail
And Tom bears logs intothe hall
And milk comes frozen homein pail,
When blood is nipp'd andways be foul,
Then nightly sings thestaring owl, Tu-whit;
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan dothkeel the pot.
While Joan dothkeel the pot. ♪
The words of Mercury are harshafter the songs of Apollo.
You that way: we this way.
(singing)